
Look
Eightieth session 
Item 13 
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and 
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations 
conferences and summits in the economic, social and 
related fields

Unique challenges faced by developing countries in artificial intelligence capacity-building

Report of the Secretary-General 

 
 
 
 
 The submission of this report was delayed due to missing inputs during the review process.

 	 






















I. Introduction

There is a pressing need to ensure a universal floor of artificial intelligence (AI) capacity in all countries while working to narrow the AI divide. Doing so is critical to achieving the ambitions of the Global Digital Compact and accelerating progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a way that leaves no country behind. This report builds on previous analysis and findings, including those of the 2024 Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence and the 2025 report of the Secretary-General on innovative voluntary financing options for artificial intelligence capacity-building (A/79/966), which identified financing to address underlying AI capacity needs and gaps as a common challenge faced by developing countries. This challenge persists in 2026 and warrants  action, as recommended in this report.
II. Unique challenges faced by developing countries in artificial intelligence capacity-building

While all countries must engage fast-moving AI technologies, many developing countries face additional unique challenges in AI capacity-building. One is that their initial AI capacities tend to be more limited. This includes gaps in foundational AI capacity such as in compute, associated energy and connectivity needs, high-quality data, in digital public infrastructure, model use case repositories, and in skills for AI development and deployment. It also includes gaps in enabler AI capacity such as in relevant legislative, regulatory and governance frameworks with appropriate accountability and redress mechanisms (including in relation to human, gender, and labour rights), in institutional public service capacity to assess, procure, deploy, apply and govern AI effectively, and in capacity to participate in international AI governance processes. These gaps hinder both the development of domestic AI industry and public sector capacity to adopt, assess, and govern AI solutions.

Most developing countries also face constraints which hinder growth in AI capacities that support national development priorities. These can include data scarcity in languages with limited digital representation, nascent digital economies with limited digital infrastructure, and talent brain drains across public and private sectors. Such constraints can combine to make the risk-adjusted rates of return on capital too low to attract adequate private investment or loans for local AI capacity, limiting developing countries’ bargaining power vis-à-vis technology providers. These constraints can also reinforce existing inequalities within countries, limiting who is able to access and benefit from AI. For developing countries that can be characterised as  of AI maturity (A/79/966), a lack of adequate financing is a unique challenge limiting AI capacity-building for local development, resulting in less-informed choices, passive technological consumption and a widening divides.

The window for concerted action to harness the benefits of AI while addressing its risks is rapidly closing. The central challenge is to efficiently develop a minimum AI capacity in all countries, strengthening agency to promote the welfare and respect fundamental human rights of their peoples, including the right to privacy and to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment, and dependency. To understand the technology, its implications, how to govern it, and how to develop, deploy and use it responsibly, including as an enabling layer for other technologies, countries require a minimum across all dimensions of AI capacity tailored to national contexts. Such direct technical exposure is for countries to experience, experiment with and harness AI technologies via real world applications in their own local contexts, thereby developing clear understanding of opportunities, risks and governance steps to be taken. Member States also require public sector institutional capacity, including at subnational levels, to govern and use AI technologies and foster local ecosystems aligned with national priorities, and for an evidence base to support policymaking through a whole-of-government approach.

The United Nations system has been scaling up its response, including conducting AI readiness assessments and partnering to provide guidance and support to Member States in different areas. Examples include efforts across the ITU, UNDP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UN-HABITAT, UNICEF, UNIDO and the UN Secretariat (DESA, ODET, OHCHR, UNCTAD, UNODA and Regional Economic Commissions). These efforts, alongside the work of industry, civil society, and academia, amount to several millions of dollars in programming. However, they are insufficient to cover all countries at the necessary scale to keep pace with technological change.

Current financing for AI capacity-building is fragmented and leaves significant geographical gaps. At a time when private investment in AI infrastructure exceeds half a trillion US dollars annualised, a needs-based Global Fund for AI Capacity Building, with the active involvement of all stakeholders and initial funding commitments in the range of $3 billion over four years could help mobilize and direct resources at scale to enable countries that do not yet have  AI capacity  to move to Tier 1 or 2. This would represent a crucial achievement to enable all countries to leverage AI to accelerate inclusive and equitable sustainable development. In this regard, a thorough mapping of a country’s AI needs and capacities vis-a-vis its development priorities will be essential to ensure that all countries regardless of their development trajectory can benefit from AI to address their unique challenges. Such a fund should complement existing United Nations and in-kind contribution mechanisms and international partnerships, mobilizing additional resources and scaling up existing efforts while advancing nationally owned strategies and measurable development outcomes could be within or outside the UN system. Potential models for such a Fund could include, among others, the independent Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, the Global Financing Facility, and some of those analysed in A/79/966.
III. Recommendations

The General Assembly  endorse the need for and take steps to advance the establishment of a Global Fund for AI Capacity Development, including elaborating its strategic objectives, governance, and administration at the eighty-first session of the General Assembly, informed by the recommendations of the High-level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence, A/79/966 and a forthcoming discussion paper on the governance and operating model of such a fund, based inter alia on consultations with potential donors, stakeholders and the UN system convened by the Secretary-General. 

The General Assembly may wish to request the Secretary-General to report regularly on the state of AI capacity across countries, supported by measurable indicators of progress including against national AI strategies and drawing on existing methodologies within the United Nations system, until appropriate regular reporting arrangements on AI capacity needs are agreed.  

Member States are encouraged to nominate additional centres to join the United Nations-supported Global Network for Exchange and Cooperation on AI Capacity Building.
Summary 
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 78/311, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to report to it at its eightieth session on the unique challenges faced by developing countries in artificial intelligence capacity-building, with recommendations to address those challenges.